Alright, it's time now for a challenge this is
the reading user input challenge so the
challenge goes like this read ten
numbers from the console entered by the
user and print the sum of those ten
numbers and you want to create a scanner
like we did in the previous video
use the has next int method from the
scanner to check if the user has entered
an int or an integer value now if has
next int returns false print out the
message invalid number to the console
and you want to continue reading from
the console until you've read ten
numbers in use the next int method to
get each number and add it to the sum
before the user enters each number print
out a message enter number hash X where
X represents the count 1 2 3 4 etc and
it's an example there the first message
would look something like answer number
hash 1 : the next enter number has 2 :
and so on and the hints use a while loop
secondly use a counter variable for
counting valid numbers thirdly close the
scanner after you don't need it anymore
and the project will be creating should
be called reading user input challenge
so that's it see if you can figure it
out pause the video now and try out that
challenge and once you're ready to see
my version of the code come back and
we'll go through it so pause the video now
okay welcome back hopefully you managed
to get it working so let's break down
this challenge into smaller pieces first
off we need to read ten numbers from the
console as well as count them and in in
addition calculate their sum after we
have ten valid numbers we're going to
break out of a while loop in this
instance we should set a condition in
the while loop which checks that a use
or when a user has entered ten valid
numbers so let's start off by creating
the scanner and also it's set close
method on the next line so that we have
to get to add that later
alright so firstly scanner scanner
equals new scanner and in parentheses
have any system dot in you go to select
that option there to bring up the pop-up
I'm going to make sure I select Java dot
you tool and you can always know that
you've got the right one there
incidentally if you can see in the
import it shows Java dot util dot
scanner alright and the next I'm going
to type in scanner dot close parentheses
to close it off all right now we're
going to add two variables counter and
some so moving forward all the code will
be adding will be written between these
lines the scanner definition on line
nine and the scanner got close on line
12 so for the variables let's start by
typing into counter is equal to zero
then we'll also do it into some equals
zero now the counter variable is going
to count the valid numbers and the sum
variable represents the sum of the
counter numbers so our next step is to
loop until we read ten numbers that the
user of the application has entered into
the console for this purpose we have to
use a while loop so I'm going to start
with a while loop that never completes
so while true if the opening and closing
curly braces there so I said that it
never completes so what does this while
true actually mean well by typing in and
as we've done there and I'll just fix
this typo before I continue so by typing
in while true we're effectively creating
an endless loop or
that doesn't complete since the
condition that we've entered in
parentheses on line 14 is always true
because true itself is always true in
other words the loop never ends and it's
a situation we have discussed in
previous videos but later in this video
I'm going to show you a solution to this
challenge without using an endless loop
now since this type of loop never ends
we need something to break out of it in
this case a break statement so when the
counter reaches 10 as in once the user
has entered 10 valid numbers we can set
a break statement to exit out of the
loop now we could also accomplish the
same thing without a break statement by
checking the counter variable but it's a
good idea to get used to using a break
statement before the user starts
entering numbers we should print out a
message that instructs the user on what
to do first I'm going to create an int
variable called order and set it equal
to counter plus 1 so int order equals
counter plus 1 and notice that we've got
an error here we've got this unreachable
statement and the problem here is that
intellij is telling us that you've
written a statement here that never
exits it never finishes how it's an
endless loop so consequently the code
can never get down to here but you'll
find that that disappears once we've
written some code in this while loop
that actually allows us to break out of
the loop alright so getting back to this
order variable on line 15 well this will
impact the message we print to the user
so the idea is to substitute order for X
in the message enter number has X so
that the user is informed and when to
enter the first number the second and so
on so let's print out this message so
we'll do a stem out I'm going to put
enter number hash close double quote
plus order plus then we'll add a colon
there and it close off the double quote
like so so that's going to print out
that message to the user
now since order is equal to count plus 1
the number will increment each time it
cycles through the loop so this means
that after the user enters the first
number they'll receive a prompt for the
second number and then the third etc now
technically we could write this all on
one line but it might look a bit
complicated and become difficult to read
so we've broken it down into two lines
here so the next step then is to add an
if statement and use the has next line
method so that's the file a boolean here
it's a boolean and we're a course one is
an int equals scanner dot has next int
now if you recall this has next int
method will check if a valid number has
been entered into the console now if the
user enters a wrong value then this this
has next int method will return false
meaning out is an int variable will be
set to false if that's the case we don't
want to increment the counter so we need
another if here to test for that value
so we're going to believe isn't it now
if pausing does file in other words it's
not a number because the users entered
something other than a number and then
we should print a message stating that
an invalid number was entered so to do
this we need to add the else and the
code block to do that so I'm going to
put that down here else over in our code
block and we're going to print out a
message there invalid number that
handles an invalid nothing else let's
also take this opportunity outside of
that code block down here after the else
statement finished to handle the Enter
key being pressed and remove any invalid
input from the scanner and it's also
ensures that we don't accidentally end
up in an endless loop due to unforseen
input so we're going to types together
dot next line or put a note here to
remind us what it's for so it's going to
be handled end on line enter key now
inside of our if statement we can start
generating the code that will read the
number and save it as a variable this is
the code here that's currently empty so
we go to begin by typing int number
equals scanner dot next int
now you might be wondering at this point
why I haven't put the next line method
that we've got down on line 27 why
haven't I put that on line 22 in other
words right below the line I've just
typed in well if the user was to enter
an invalid number the else statement
would run in print invalid number
however since the user did enter content
it would need to be read and removed
from the scanner before additional
content is entered so since the next
line call handles that by reading input
and not storing it it needs to be after
the else statement not in the if
statement otherwise the invalid content
would not be removed and our application
wouldn't run as desired
now another solution would be to add
next line right after the next int
method here and then add another next
line inside of the else statement
however generally speaking it's not
recommended to duplicate code which
would be doing there would be putting
two lines of code in when one would
suffice so let's leave this next line
after the else statement where it is now
which again handles invalid input and
the enter key by reading the line are
not storing the input all right so now
that we're retrieving numbers from the
user let's work on the remaining steps
calculating the sum of the numbers
incrementing the count and then breaking
over the loop once we've got ten valid
numbers first so let's increment our
variable counter it's a counter plus
plus you've got a valid numbers how are
incrementing that count and then we want
to add the current number to our sum
variable which is of course the sum of
all the numbers entered so that's gonna
be some plus equals number so a
recommended counter and adding some
inside of the if statement since we've
only got a valid number when the if
condition is true on line 20 in other
words if parsing succeeds and we have
got a valid number then obviously the
number is valid for that reason and we
can add the number to our sum and
increment the counter all right so next
we now need to break out of the loop
once we reach ten numbers and this is
where the counter variable comes into
play so let's add the following if
statement that breaks out of the loop one
counter equals 10 so we're going to
check their on that next line we're
going to put if counter is equal to 10
now the code block I'm going to type
break and then that's when I typed in
that break there that the error
immediately disappeared on line 34 and
that's because IntelliJ is now
determined that there is a way to break
out of this loop and therefore this line
of code can be reached this is pretty
cool that IntelliJ smart enough to
figure that out for us so again to
refresh our current loop was endless was
an endless loop which would never
complete because while true that we've
entered on line 14 remained true and
therefore kept looping by having this
break statement as we've done now on
line 25 we can break out of the loop
once our counter reaches 10 the last
step now we need to add to our program
is to print out the sum to the console
now we've got two options here we could
type it inside of the if statement where
we're checking the counter or after the
while loop now I'm going to type it
after the while loop so I think it's
more appropriate to put it there so it's
write down literally on the line before
the scan about close I'm going to print
out some equals in double quotes plus
sum alright so that's it one of the
possible solutions to this challenge so
keep in mind in programming there's
almost always multiple ways of doing
things one example of that was I just
mentioned that I could print out the sum
we've given the while loop instead of
outside of it alright so let's try
running it oh we're down here we've got
entered number hash one as you can see
in the screen there so I'm getting going
to pressed or ain't a rather number 10
press ENTER it's asking is for number 2
so let's try to enter some characters to
test the number checking capabilities so
I'm just going to type ABC and press Enter
you see it's got invalid number then
it's reap romp ting us again to enter
number 2 so that's good it means that
the counter variable only incremented
when the number was valid now if we
enter another invalid number the same
thing will be printed read same thing again so
we got into number two and invalid
numbers showing again that was received
achieved rather with the help of the
order variable if you recall we set
order equal to counter plus one and see
that there one line 15 and again
remembering that counter started with
zero which is while we're adding the
plus one code there on line 15
so changing the number count adds a nice
dynamic quality to the messages the
users receiving on the console all right
so let's go ahead now and finish the
program by entering the other numbers so
into 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 and you
can see that the program's nicely exited
after I entered 100 and some equals 550
which is the correct sum for those 10
numbers so that's my solution to the
challenge hopefully you've got something
similar or along those lines bearing in
mind it certainly didn't need to be
identical now just before I finish the
video I mentioned that there's a
solution that doesn't involve using a
break statement so instead of while true
what we can do is change the condition
to something that would eventually
become false such as counter less than
10 for argument's sake so what we could
have done instead this is another
example we have there's always nearly
always multiple solutions to a given
problem we can comment this line out
actually what I do is I will duplicate
it and I'll comment that line out and
instead of well true what we'll do is
we'll put while counter less than 10 and
now that I've done that I could comment
out the break statements since we no
longer need that we don't need to put a
test here for 10 because we're going to
test there now on line 15 so let's test
that to make sure that it still works
but that's the only changes we need to
make we'll do the same thing 20 ABC ABC
Fred that's still working 20 30 40 50 60
70 80 90 100 so as you can see there are
different ways to solve a challenge this
challenge and literally any code you
write and it's going to be true of many
perhaps most things that you face in the
real world so the point I'm making here
is yuko doesn't have to match
what might look like 100% it's
completely ok as long as the end result
is you've managed to meet or exceed the
challenge requirements so that's it I
hope you've enjoyed this challenge and
got a lot out of it let's now move on to
the next video and in that one I'm going
to set you another challenge this time
it's a minimum and maximum challenge so
I'll see you in the next video.